The NLP Center of New York

Welcome to nlptraining.com, the home of The NLP Center of New York? ?, one of the world's leading training and consulting organizations for NLP (Neuro-Linguistic Programming) and Ericksonian Hypnosis. 

The NLP Center of New York? ? located in Greenwich Village in New York City was founded in 1986 by Rachel Hott, Ph.D., NYS licensed clinical psychologist and Steven Leeds, M.A., LMHC, NYS licensed mental health counselor and educator. For the past 25 years, the NLP Center of New York has been committed to providing the highest quality NLP and Hypnosis training anywhere, at all levels. 

Our mission is to teach people how to heal the past, shape the future and live more fully, right now. Our NLP and Ericksonian Hypnosis training programs and our consulting services that include, coaching, psychotherapy and hypnotherapy, are designed for both personal and professional development. We also offer specialized courses including NLP and Sales Mastery, Building a Coaching Practice that Inspires, Power at Work and Core Transformation as well as on-site corporate training. 

The NLP Center of New York provides dynamic, interactive, hands on training where you will get the direct "experience" of NLP and Ericksonian Hypnosis along with the personal attention and immediate feedback designed to enhance your personal power and provide the skills for interpersonal excellence. When you train at the NLP Center of New York, not only do you get the highest quality training with top NLP trainers, but you get to participate in a dynamic community of individuals committed to making a difference in the world.

Learn more about The NLP Center of New York and discover how these transformational models can make a significant difference in your life. Register for our courses directly on-line with our secure server. We accept all major credit cards. Contact us to learn more about our training programs and individual counseling, coaching, hypnotherapy sessions.

Our phone number is 212-647-0860. Our email address is info@nlptraining.com.

" The truest measure of any NLP institute is the quality of the people who emerge from its training programs. By that measure, the NLP Center of New York is surely one of the finest in the world. Again and again, I have been impressed by the depth and range of their participants¡¯ grasp of the field of NLP. These people obviously revel in learning. This is not only inspiring, but a delight to be a part of, as well. The NLP Center of New York? ? is a true home of NLP"
??David Gordon, author and NLP Trainer and Developer

Our individual NLP psychotherapy and coaching sessions are provided by NYS Licensed Mental Health Counselor, Steven Leeds and NYS Licensed Clinical Psychologist, Dr. Rachel Hott. If you have ¡°out of network¡± insurance, check with your insurance company regarding coverage. We also accept Medicare clients.

All NLP and Hypnosis courses are held at the NLP Center of New York? ? located at 24 East 12th St. 4th Floor in Manhattan unless otherwise specified.

Feel free to call us at 212-647-0860 or email info@nlptraining.com

We look forward to having you join us for this exciting and inspiring journey.