What Is Neuro-Linguistic Programming Or NLP?
Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) is the science of modelling the patterns of human behavior. NLP explores the inner workings of the human mind: how we think, how we develop our desires, goals and fears and how we motivate ourselves, make connections, and give meaning to our experiences.

NLP is like the ¡®user¡¯s manual¡¯ for the mind, and allows us to use the language of the mind to consistently achieve our specific and desired outcomes. read more

Because NLP affects how we think, you can have the changes you want in many areas.

So many areas, in fact, to give you an idea here are some of the tough ones we have proven solutions for: Allergies, Critical People, Compulsions, Grief, Shame, Phobias, Influence, Creativity, Presentations, Public Speaking.  Click on the one that interests you most here: 

Creating Irresistible Influence With NLP

Relieving Allergies

Fast Phobia/Trauma Relief

The Walt Disney Creativity Strategy

The Fundamentals Of Great Presentations and Group Dynamics

Negotiations: Winning More Than Money

Some of these presume some knowledge of NLP, and you¡¯ll get a lot out of them in any case. If anything isn¡¯t clear or you don¡¯t get the results you want, we want to know. We want you to get the relief and solutions you want from NLP.

We will answer your questions, point you to additional support, or just refund your purchase, as  you like, no worries. We simply want to bring a little more sanity and satisfaction to the world. This is how we¡¯re doing it while making a profit and having fun in the process. :-) We¡¯d really like you to have that, too.

For you fans of NLP here¡¯s a selection of some high interest processes (you¡¯ll know the applications)

The Eye Movement Integration Process

Making Futures Real

NLP Modeling

And The Ever Popular
Advanced Language Patterns
Or The Full Ride:

Have The Convenience Of NLP Training In Your Own Home

¡°The Portable NLP Practitioner Training¡± Put NLP to work for you, at your own pace, when and where you want it. Whether You¡¯re brand new to NLP or you¡¯ve had NLP training and want to refresh and deepen your skills, ¡°The Portable Practitioner Training¡± is 20 full days of training on 37 dvds, a fully cross-referenced, indexed manual, a quick start guide, online self assessment, and a lot more. Find out all about it here.